In this section,
we're going to review RabbitMQ and performing an integration
using the AMQP support in Spring Integration.
RabbitMQ uses the Advanced Message Queueing Protocol, or AMQP.
AMQP is an open standard for passing business messages
between applications or organizations.
In other words,
it's a platform‑independent protocol that connects disparate systems.
It uses a binary protocol that can be used by different
programming languages on different platforms.
AMQP works as follows.
A producer publishes a message to an exchange inside the AMQP broker.
AMQP does not support standard Spring Integration messages,
so the AMQP library creates a message abstraction that
ultimately sends a byte array to the exchange.
The exchange is responsible for routing messages with
links and routing keys to various queues.
A queue is a buffer that stores messages,
and consumers receive messages from queues.
As I mentioned in the previous section,
we receive messages from a message broker through an inbound channel,
and we send messages to a broker using an output channel.
To integrate with AMQP,
the AmqpOutboundChannelAdapter provides inbound channel adaptor capabilities,
and the AmqpOutboundEndpoint provides outbound channel adaptor capabilities.
Let's review how to create an inbound channel adapter that works with AMQP.
First, we create a MessageChannel to which messages should be delivered.
Next,
we create a simple MessageListenerContainer that
accepts as input a ConnectionFactory,
which will be created when Spring finds RabbitMQ in the class path.
The container handles the active responsibilities so
that listeners can remain passive.
It uses the provided ConnectionFactory to connect to RabbitMQ and
listen for messages on the specified queue.
Finally,
the AmqpInboundChannelAdapter creates an inbound channel adapter
using the message listenerContainer and publishes messages that it
receives to the specified output channel.
Now let's review how to create an outbound channel adapter.
We begin by creating a MessageChannel to which our application will
publish messages that should be sent to RabbitMQ.
Next, we create the queue to which we want to publish our messages.
And finally we create an AmqpOutboundEndpoint that is invoked when a
message is published to the amqpOutboundChannel,
The AmqpOutboundEndpoint is configured with an amqpTemplate,
which Spring will automatically create for us when it
finds RabbitMQ in our class path,
and we specify the queue name to which we want to publish our
messages as the AmqpOutboundEndpoint's routing key.
When the AMQP exchange receives the message,
it will use this routing key to route the message to the specified queue name.
For our example,
we're going to integrate the foo reservation system into the
Globomantics conference registration system.
When a user books a reservation in the foo reservation system,
it will publish a message to the foo reservation queue in
RabbitMQ and will handle that message to register the user
for a particular conference.
The code example we'll look at runs in two different JVMs.
The foo reservation publisher application defines a
FoodReservationService that publishes a foo reservation to an
AmqpOutboundEndpoint that sends it to the RabbitMQ exchange that
routes it to the foo reservation queue.
The Globomantics reservation service defines an
AmqpInboundChannelAdapter that listens for messages on that queue
and publishes his messages to the foo reservation listener.
In order to run the example application,
you're going to need a RabbitMQ instance to connect to.
You can download and install RabbitMQ,
or you can run it inside a Docker container.
I've tested the example application using the official RabbitMQ Docker image,
so if you've installed Docker Desktop on your computer,
you can run it with this command.
The official RabbitMQ Docker image is rabbitmq:3,
where rabbitmq is the name of the image and 3 is the version.
I opted to run 3‑management so that we can access the
RabbitMQ web interface on port 15672.
The default username is guest, and the default password is guest.
For more configuration options, see the RabbitMQ DockerHub page.
But this configuration is a simple way to get a RabbitMQ instance
up and running in your local Docker environment.
Let's dive into the code and see this in action.
We'll begin by building two applications,
the foo reservation publisher,
which will use an AmqpOutboundEndpoint to publish foo reservations to RabbitMQ,
and the Globomantics Registration Service,
which will use an AmqpInboundChannelAdapter to
receive and process those messages.
Then we'll start both applications, publish foo reservations to RabbitMQ,
and validate that the Globomantics Registration Service receives those messages.
The RabbitMQ config class is a Spring Configuration class.
It creates a DirectChannel named reservationChannel and then an
ObjectToJsonTransformer that receives messages from the
reservationChannel and publishes messages to the amqpOutboundChannel.
Because AMQP uses a binary protocol, we can only send serializable objects to it,
and a JSON string is a good candidate,
especially for interoperability with other systems.
We then create another DirectChannel named amqpOutboundChannel that is used
by a ServiceActivator to invoke our AMQP outbound bean.
This bean creates an AmqpOutboundEndpoint and sets its routing key to the
name of the queue to which we want to publish the message,
which in this case, is foo‑reservation‑queue.
When the RabbitMQ exchange receives the message and sees this routing key,
it will know to publish the message to the queue with the same name.
Finally, we could go into RabbitMQ and create the queue manually,
but instead we create a new queue bean with the name of
the queue that we want to create.
This will cause Spring to create the queue in RabbitMQ for us.
The foo reservation gateway is a messaging gateway that
publishes messages to the reservationChannel.
It defines a single method, publishReservation,
that accepts a fooReservation and publishes it to the reservationChannel.
A FooReservation is a plain old Java object that has an id and a name.
The FooReservationService is a Spring service that
publishes foo reservations to the FooReservation gateway
through its publishReservation method.
The RabbitMQ example application is a command‑line Spring Boot
application with the FooReservation service wired into it that
creates six reservations and publishes them to the
FoodReservationService with a 2‑second delay.
This is the application that will publish our reservations.
So now let's look at the application that will receive the reservations.
The RabbitMQ inbound config is a Spring Configuration class.
It creates a new DirectChannel named
fooReservationListenerChannel and then and
AmqpInboundChannelAdapter that sends messages to that channel.
It's configured with a simple message listenerContainer
that accepts a connectionFactory,
which Spring will create for us when it sees RabbitMQ in our class path
and sets the name of the queue on which to listen.
This is all that you need to do to listen for messages on a RabbitMQ
queue and publish those messages to a channel.
We also create the same channel that we did in the previous application.
This is only required if the queue does not already exist.
But if we start our listener application before starting our
publishing application and the queue does not exist,
then the application will fail to start.
And don't worry, as long as the names match, it will not create a new queue.
The fooReservationListener is a Spring service with a
ServiceActivator that receives messages from the
fooReservationListenerChannel and invokes the handleMessage method.
At this point,
we're just going to log the payload of the message that we receive.
Finally,
the RabbitMQ example application is a command line Spring Boot application.
Spring will find our configuration component in the fooReservationListener
service in its component scan and start listening for messages.
Let's start the listening application and the publishing application.
We can see from the logs that it publishes six messages, and in the listener application we can see those messages bean received.